Roald Dahl
James and the Giant Peach

This book is for Olivia and Tessa

One

Until he was four years old, James Henry Trotter had a happy life. He
lived peacefully with his mother and father in a beautiful house
beside the sea. There were always plenty of other children for him to
play with, and there was the sandy beach for him to run about on,
and the ocean to paddle in. It was the perfect life for a small boy.
Then, one day, James’s mother and father went to London to do
some shopping, and there a terrible thing happened. Both of them
suddenly got eaten up (in full daylight, mind you, and on a crowded
street) by an enormous angry rhinoceros which had escaped from the
London Zoo.
Now this, as you can well imagine, was a rather nasty experience
for two such gentle parents. But in the long run it was far nastier for
James than it was for them. Their troubles were all over in a jiffy.
They were dead and gone in thirty-five seconds flat. Poor James, on
the other hand, was still very much alive, and all at once he found
himself alone and frightened in a vast unfriendly world. The lovely
house by the seaside had to be sold immediately, and the little boy,
carrying nothing but a small suitcase containing a pair of pyjamas and
a toothbrush, was sent away to live with his two aunts.
Their names were Aunt Sponge and Aunt Spiker, and I am sorry to
say that they were both really horrible people. They were selfish and
lazy and cruel, and right from the beginning they started beating poor
James for almost no reason at all. They never called him by his real
name, but always referred to him as ‘you disgusting little beast’ or
‘you filthy nuisance’ or ‘you miserable creature’, and they certainly
never gave him any toys to play with or any picture books to look at.
His room was as bare as a prison cell.
They lived – Aunt Sponge, Aunt Spiker, and now James as well – in
a queer ramshackle house on the top of a high hill in the south of
England. The hill was so high that from almost anywhere in the
garden James could look down and see for miles and miles across a
marvellous landscape of woods and fields; and on a very clear day, if
he looked in the right direction, he could see a tiny grey dot far away
on the horizon, which was the house that he used to live in with his
beloved mother and father. And just beyond that, he could see the
ocean itself – a long thin streak of blackish-blue, like a line of ink,
beneath the rim of the sky.
But James was never allowed to go down off the top of that hill.
Neither Aunt Sponge nor Aunt Spiker could ever be bothered to take
him out herself, not even for a small walk or a picnic, and he certainly
wasn’t permitted to go alone. ‘The nasty little beast will only get into
mischief if he goes out of the garden,’ Aunt Spiker had said. And
terrible punishments were promised him, such as being locked up in
the cellar with the rats for a week, if he even so much as dared to
climb over the fence.
The garden, which covered the whole of the top of the hill, was
large and desolate, and the only tree in the entire place (apart from a
clump of dirty old laurel bushes at the far end) was an ancient peach
tree that never gave any peaches. There was no swing, no seesaw, no
sand pit, and no other children were ever invited to come up the hill
to play with poor James. There wasn’t so much as a dog or a cat
around to keep him company. And as time went on, he became sadder
and sadder, and more and more lonely, and he used to spend hours
every day standing at the bottom of the garden, gazing wistfully at the
lovely but forbidden world of woods and fields and ocean that was
spread out below him like a magic carpet.

Two
After James Henry Trotter had been living with his aunts for three
whole years there came a morning when something rather peculiar
happened to him. And this thing, which as I say was only rather
peculiar, soon caused a second thing to happen which was very
peculiar. And then the very peculiar thing, in its own turn, caused a
really fantastically peculiar thing to occur.
It all started on a blazing hot day in the middle of summer. Aunt
Sponge, Aunt Spiker and James were all out in the garden. James had
been put to work, as usual. This time he was chopping wood for the
kitchen stove. Aunt Sponge and Aunt Spiker were sitting comfortably
in deck-chairs near by, sipping tall glasses of fizzy lemonade and
watching him to see that he didn’t stop work for one moment.
Aunt Sponge was enormously fat and very short. She had small
piggy eyes, a sunken mouth, and one of those white flabby faces that
looked exactly as though it had been boiled. She was like a great
white soggy overboiled cabbage. Aunt Spiker, on the other hand, was
lean and tall and bony, and she wore steel-rimmed spectacles that
fixed on to the end of her nose with a clip. She had a screeching voice
and long wet narrow lips, and whenever she got angry or excited,
little flecks of spit would come shooting out of her mouth as she
talked. And there they sat, these two ghastly hags, sipping their
drinks, and every now and again screaming at James to chop faster
and faster. They also talked about themselves, each one saying how
beautiful she thought she was. Aunt
Sponge had a long-handled mirror on her lap, and she kept picking it
up and gazing at her own hideous face.
‘I look and smell,’ Aunt Sponge declared, ‘as lovely as a rose!
Just feast your eyes upon my face, observe my shapely nose!
Behold my heavenly silky locks!
And if I take off both my socks
You’ll see my dainty toes.’
‘But don’t forget,’ Aunt Spiker cried, ‘how much your tummy shows!’
Aunt Sponge went red. Aunt Spiker said, ‘My sweet, you cannot win,
Behold MY gorgeous curvy shape, my teeth, my charm ing grin!
Oh, beauteous me! How I adore
My radiant looks! And please ignore
The pimple on my chin.’
‘My dear old trout!’ Aunt Sponge cried out, ‘You’re only bones and skin!’
‘Such loveliness as I possess can only truly shine
In Hollywood!’ Aunt Sponge declared: ‘Oh, wouldn’t that be fine!
I’d capture all the nations’ hearts!
They’d give me all the leading parts!
The stars would all resign!’
‘I think you’d make,’ Aunt Spiker said, ‘a lovely Frankenstein.’
Poor James was still slaving away at the chopping-block. The heat
was terrible. He was sweating all over. His arm was aching. The
chopper was a large blunt thing far too heavy for a small boy to use.
And as he worked, James began thinking about all the other children
in the world and what they might be doing at this moment. Some
would be riding tricycles in their gardens. Some would be walking in
cool woods and picking bunches of wild flowers. And all the little
friends whom he used to know would be down by the seaside, playing
in the wet sand and splashing around in the water…
Great tears began oozing out of James’s eyes and rolling down his
cheeks. He stopped working and leaned against the chopping-block,
overwhelmed by his own unhappiness.
‘What’s the matter with you?’ Aunt Spiker screeched, glaring at him
over the top of her steel spectacles.
James began to cry.
‘Stop that immediately and get on with your work, you nasty little
beast!’ Aunt Sponge ordered.
‘Oh, Auntie Sponge!’ James cried out. ‘And Auntie Spiker! Couldn’t
we all – please – just for once – go down to the seaside on the bus? It
isn’t very far – and I feel so hot and awful and lonely…’
‘Why, you lazy good-for-nothing brute!’ Aunt Spiker shouted.
‘Beat him!’ cried Aunt Sponge.
‘I certainly will!’ Aunt Spiker snapped. She glared at James, and
James looked back at her with large frightened eyes. ‘I shall beat you
later on in the day when I don’t feel so hot,’ she said. ‘And now get
out of my sight, you disgusting little worm, and give me some peace!’
James turned and ran. He ran off as fast as he could to the far end
of the garden and hid himself behind that clump of dirty old laurel
bushes that we mentioned earlier on. Then he covered his face with
his hands and began to cry and cry.

Three
It was at this point that the first thing of all, the rather peculiar thing
that led to so many other much more peculiar things, happened to
him.
For suddenly, just behind him, James heard a rustling of leaves,
and he turned round and saw an old man in a funny dark-green suit
emerging from the bushes. He was a very small old man, but he had a
huge bald head and a face that was covered all over with bristly black
whiskers. He stopped when he was about three yards away, and he
stood there leaning on his stick and staring hard at James.
When he spoke, his voice was very slow and creaky. ‘Come closer
to me, little boy,’ he said, beckoning to James with a finger. ‘Come
right up close to me and I will show you something wonderful.’
James was too frightened to move.
The old man hobbled a step or two nearer, and then he put a hand
into the pocket of his jacket and took out a small white paper bag.
‘You see this?’ he whispered, waving the bag gently to and fro in
front of James’s face. ‘You know what this is, my dear? You know
what’s inside this little bag?’
Then he came nearer still, leaning forward and pushing his face so
close to James that James could feel breath blowing on his cheeks.
The breath smelled musty and stale and slightly mildewed, like air in
an old cellar.
‘Take a look, my dear,’ he said, opening the bag and tilting it
towards James. Inside it, James could see a mass of tiny green things
that looked like little stones or crystals, each one about the size of a
grain of rice. They were extraordinarily beautiful, and there was a
strange brightness about them, a sort of luminous quality that made
them glow and sparkle in the most wonderful way.
‘Listen to them!’ the old man whispered. ‘Listen to them move!’
James stared into the bag, and sure enough there was a faint
rustling sound coming up from inside it, and then he noticed that all
the thousands of little green things were slowly, very very slowly
stirring about and moving over each other as though they were alive.
‘There’s more power and magic in those things in there than in all
the rest of the world put together,’ the old man said softly.
‘But – but – what are they?’ James murmured, finding his voice at
last. ‘Where do they come from?’
‘Ah-ha,’ the old man whispered. ‘You’d never guess that!’ He was
crouching a little now and pushing his face still closer and closer to
James until the tip of his long nose was actually touching the skin on
James’s forehead. Then suddenly he jumped back and began waving
his stick madly in the air. ‘Crocodile tongues!’ he cried. ‘One thousand
long slimy crocodile tongues boiled up in the skull of a dead witch for
twenty days and nights with the eyeballs of a lizard! Add the fingers
of a young monkey, the gizzard of a pig, the beak of a green parrot,
the juice of a porcupine, and three spoonfuls of sugar. Stew for
another week, and then let the moon do the rest!’
All at once, he pushed the white paper bag into James’s hands, and
said, ‘Here! You take it! It’s yours!’

Four
James Henry Trotter stood there clutching the bag and staring at the
old man.
‘And now,’ the old man said, ‘all you‘ve got to do is this. Take a
large jug of water, and pour all the little green things into it. Then,
very slowly, one by one, add ten hairs from your own head. That sets
them off! It gets them going! In a couple of minutes the water will
begin to froth and bubble furiously, and as soon as that happens you
must quickly drink it all down, the whole jugful, in one gulp. And
then, my dear, you will feel it churning and boiling in your stomach,
and steam will start coming out of your mouth, and immediately after
that, marvellous things will start happening to you, fabulous,
unbelievable things – and you will never be miserable again in your
life. Because you are miserable, aren’t you? You needn’t tell me! I
know all about it! Now, off you go and do exactly as I say. And don’t
whisper a word of this to those two horrible aunts of yours! Not a
word! And don’t let those green things in there get away from you
either! Because if they do escape, then they will be working their
magic upon somebody else instead of upon you! And that isn’t what
you want at all, is it, my dear? Whoever they meet first, be it bug, insect,
animal, or tree, that will be the one who gets the full power of their magic!
So hold the bag tight! Don’t tear the paper! Off you go! Hurry up!
Don’t wait! Now’s the time! Hurry!’
With that, the old man turned away and disappeared into the
bushes.

Five
The next moment, James was running back towards the house as fast
as he could go. He would do it all in the kitchen, he told himself – if
only he could get in there without Aunt Sponge and Aunt Spiker
seeing him. He was terribly excited. He flew through the long grass
and the stinging-nettles, not caring whether he got stung or not on his
bare knees, and in the distance he could see Aunt Sponge and Aunt
Spiker sitting in their chairs with their backs towards him. He
swerved away from them so as to go round the other side of the
house, but then suddenly, just as he was passing underneath the old
peach tree that stood in the middle of the garden, his foot slipped and
he fell flat on his face in the grass. The paper bag burst open as it hit
the ground and the thousands of tiny green things were scattered in
all directions.
James immediately picked himself up on to his hands and knees
and started searching around for his precious treasures. But what was
this? They were all sinking into the soil! He could actually see them
wriggling and twisting as they burrowed their way downward into the
hard earth, and at once he reached out a hand to pick some of them
up before it was too late, but they disappeared right under his fingers.
He went after some others, and the same thing happened! He began
scrabbling around frantically in an effort to catch hold of those that
were left, but they were too quick for him. Each time the tips of his
fingers were just about to touch them, they vanished into the earth!
And soon, in the space of only a few seconds, every single one of them
had gone!
James felt like crying. He would never get them back now – they
were lost, lost, lost for ever.
But where had they gone to? And why in the world had they been
so eager to push down into the earth like that? What were they after?
There was nothing down there. Nothing except the roots of the old
peach tree… and a whole lot of earthworms and centipedes and
insects living in the soil.
But what was it that the old man had said? Whoever they meet first,
be it bug, insect, animal, or tree, that will be the one who gets the full
power of their magic!
Good heavens, thought James. What is going to happen in that case
if they do meet an earthworm? Or a centipede? Or a spider? And what
if they do go into the roots of the peach tree?
‘Get up at once, you lazy little beast!’ a voice was suddenly
shouting in James’s ear. James glanced up and saw Aunt Spiker
standing over him, grim and tall and bony, glaring at him through her
steel-rimmed spectacles. ‘Get back over there immediately and finish
chopping up those logs!’ she ordered.
Aunt Sponge, fat and pulpy as a jellyfish, came waddling up behind
her sister to see what was going on. ‘Why don’t we just lower the boy
down the well in a bucket and leave him there for the night?’ she
suggested. ‘That ought to teach him not to laze around like this the
whole day long.’
‘That’s a very good wheeze, my dear Sponge. But let’s make him
finish chopping up the wood first. Be off with you at once, you
hideous brat, and do some work!’
Slowly, sadly, poor James got up off the ground and went back to
the woodpile. Oh, if only he hadn’t slipped and fallen and dropped
that precious bag. All hope of a happier life had gone completely now.
Today and tomorrow and the next day and all the other days as well
would be nothing but punishment and pain, unhappiness and despair.
He picked up the chopper and was just about to start chopping
away again when he heard a shout behind him that made him stop
and turn.
